# Proposal and Validation of a Clinically Relevant Modification of the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation Diagnostic Criteria for Sepsis

Kazuma Yamakawa; Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Osaka Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Takatsuki, Japan; Yutaka Umemura; Division of Trauma and Surgical Critical Care, Osaka General Medical Center, Osaka, Japan; Katsunori Mochizuki; Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Osaka Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Takatsuki, Japan; Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Azumino Red Cross Hospital, Nagano, Japan; Tadashi Matsuoka; Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan; Takeshi Wada; Division of Acute and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Hokkaido University Faculty of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan; Mineji Hayakawa; Division of Acute and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Hokkaido University Faculty of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan; Toshiaki Iba; Department of Emergency and Disaster Medicine, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Yasuhiro Ohtomo; National Disaster Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan; Kohji Okamoto; Department of Surgery, Kitakyushu City Yahata Hospital, Kitakyushu, Japan; Toshihiko Mayumi; Department of Intensive Care Unit, Japan Community Healthcare Organization Chukyo Hospital, Nagoya, Japan; Toshiaki Ikeda; Division of Critical Care and Emergency Medicine, Tokyo Medical University Hachioji Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan; Hiroyasu Ishikura; Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan; Hiroshi Ogura; Department of Traumatology and Acute Critical Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan; Shigeki Kushimoto; Division of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; Daizoh Saitoh; Graduate School of Emergency Medical System, Kokushikan University, Tama, Japan; Satoshi Gando; Division of Acute and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Hokkaido University Faculty of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan; Department of Acute and Critical Care Medicine, Sapporo Higashi Tokushukai Hospital, Sapporo, Japan

Background Japanese Association for Acute Medicine (JAAM) disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) criteria were launched nearly 20 years ago. Following the revised conceptual definition of sepsis and subsequent omission of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) score from the latest sepsis diagnostic criteria, we omitted the SIRS score and proposed a modified version of JAAM DIC criteria, the JAAM-2 DIC criteria. Objectives To validate and compare performance between new JAAM-2 DIC criteria and conventional JAAM DIC criteria for sepsis. Methods We used three datasets containing adult sepsis patients from a multicenter nationwide Japanese cohort study (J-septic DIC, FORECAST, and SPICE-ICU registries). JAAM-2 DIC criteria omitted the SIRS score and set the cutoff value at ≥3 points. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses were performed between the two DIC criteria to evaluate prognostic value. Associations between in-hospital mortality and anticoagulant therapy according to DIC status were analyzed using propensity score weighting to compare significance of the criteria in determining introduction of anticoagulants against sepsis. Results Final study cohorts of the datasets included 2,154, 1,065, and 608 sepsis patients, respectively. ROC analysis revealed that curves for both JAAM and JAAM-2 DIC criteria as predictors of in-hospital mortality were almost consistent. Survival curves for the anticoagulant and control groups in the propensity score-weighted prediction model diagnosed using the two criteria were also almost entirely consistent. Conclusion JAAM-2 DIC criteria were equivalent to JAAM DIC criteria regarding prognostic and diagnostic values for initiating anticoagulation. The newly proposed JAAM-2 DIC criteria could be potentially alternative criteria for sepsis management.

## Introduction

Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a disorder frequently seen in critically ill patients, especially those with sepsis, that may lead to severe bleeding and organ dysfunction. 1 Because mortality is higher in patients with than without DIC, 2 3 several organizations have put forward DIC scoring systems with the aim of improving the outcome of patients with DIC. The Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare (JMHW) proposed a criteria for the diagnosis of DIC in 1976. 4 Their criteria involved the evaluation of global coagulation tests, underlying diseases, and clinical symptoms. Thereafter, the subcommittee of the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) proposed a scoring system for overt and non-overt DIC in 2001. 5 However, patients diagnosed according to the JMHW or ISTH DIC criteria are often at high risk of death at the time of diagnosis because of the delay from the onset of coagulopathy. It has been reported that these patients are missing out on the initiation of interventions in the setting of critical illness. 6 7 Thus, the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine (JAAM) proposed another DIC scoring system that aimed to make early diagnosis of DIC in acute diseases possible. 8 9 Now, both the ISTH overt- and JAAM DIC criteria are widely used in clinical settings.

The JAAM DIC criteria have several unique features compared with other DIC criteria, one of which is the inclusion of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) score. Based on the pathophysiological concept, as sepsis-induced DIC is caused by systemic inflammation and subsequent endothelial injury, inclusion of the SIRS score seemed to be reasonable. 10 The SIRS score was introduced as one of the criteria to diagnose sepsis in 1992. 11 In recent years, however, the prognostic relevance of the SIRS score has been questioned, 12 and SIRS criteria have been omitted from the latest definition of sepsis proposed in 2016 13 and are no longer used in clinical practice. Other concerns with including the SIRS score in the DIC criteria were the clinical burden on physicians and inter-observer variability in scoring. To determine the SIRS score, several vital signs need to be assessed and the score calculated. Because the SIRS criteria are now no longer used to diagnose sepsis, this burden should be eliminated.

## Study Population

This investigation was performed using three different datasets extracted from a multicenter nationwide cohort study conducted in Japan. The first dataset, the J-septic DIC dataset, was compiled in 42 intensive care units (ICUs) between January 2011 and December 2013. 2 The second dataset, the FORECAST dataset, was compiled in 59 ICUs between January 2016 and March 2017, 14 and the third dataset, the SPICE dataset, was compiled in 22 ICUs between December 2017 and May 2018. 15 In the first two datasets, patients were eligible for the registry if they were diagnosed as having severe sepsis or septic shock according to the conventional criteria proposed by the American College of Chest Physicians/Society of Critical Care Medicine (ACCP/SCCM) consensus conference in 1991 16 and were 18 years of age or older. In the present analysis, we included as the underlying diseases targeted by the JAAM-2 DIC criteria only those of sepsis patients diagnosed using the Sepsis-3 criteria (i.e., SOFA score of 2 or more points). 13

## Data Collection and Definitions

A case report form was developed for the three datasets used in this study on which the following information was recorded: age, sex, disease severity scores on the day of ICU admission, the source of ICU admission, pre-existing conditions, new organ dysfunction, primary source of infection, and concomitant therapies against sepsis. The severity of illness was evaluated at study entry according to the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score and SIRS score. The Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score was used to assess organ dysfunction, which was defined as a SOFA subscore ≥2 for each organ. 17 The primary outcome measure was all-cause in-hospital mortality.

## Newly Proposed Modified JAAM-2 DIC Criteria

We proposed novel DIC criteria named the JAAM-2 DIC criteria that were modified from the original JAAM DIC criteria. The underlying diseases targeted by the JAAM-2 DIC criteria, which comply with those of the original JAAM DIC criteria, are shown in Table 1 . 9 The SIRS score component from the JAAM DIC criteria was omitted, and the cutoff value for diagnosing DIC was set at 3 points or more ( Table 2 ).

## Statistical Analysis

The overall effectiveness of anticoagulant therapy on mortality was assessed using a Cox regression model with inverse probability-of-treatment weighting using the propensity scores. The propensity score for receiving anticoagulant therapy was calculated using multivariate logistic regression and included 25 independent variables for the J-septic DIC cohort and 30 variables for the FORECAST cohort, including age, sex, disease severity, source of ICU admission, past medical history of severe conditions, new organ dysfunctions, ICU characteristics, primary source of infection, causal microorganisms, anticoagulant therapy not for DIC, and other therapeutic interventions ( Supplementary Table S1 [available in the online version]). Hazard ratio and estimated 95% confidence interval were calculated along with estimated survival curves.

## Patient Characteristics

The patient flow diagram is shown in Fig. 1 . During the study period, 3,195 consecutive patients fulfilling the inclusion criteria were registered in the J-Septic DIC registry database. After excluding 1,040 patients who met at least one exclusion criterion, we analyzed 2,154 patients in the final study cohort. The anticoagulant group comprised 1,089 patients, and the control group comprised 1,065 patients. Similarly, we enrolled 817 patients from the FORECAST registry and 608 patients from the SPICE-ICU registry in the final study cohort.

Baseline characteristics of the study population are shown in Table 3 , Supplementary Table S2 and S3 (available in the online version). Patient characteristics such as age and sex were similar between the three datasets. After applying an inverse probability of treatment weighting with propensity score, patient characteristics, such as illness severity, as indicated by SOFA, APACHE II, and DIC scores and the rate of new organ dysfunction, were well matched between the anticoagulant and control groups.

## Prognostic Value of the Criteria

ROC curves for the original JAAM and modified JAAM-2 DIC criteria as predictors of in-hospital mortality are shown in Fig. 2 . Consistent with the three different datasets, the curves for both the JAAM and JAAM-2 DIC criteria were almost entirely consistent with each other. These data suggested that in predicting short-term mortality, use of the JAAM DIC and JAAM-2 DIC criteria was considered to be equivalent.

## Validity of the Criteria in Initiating Anticoagulation

Survival curves for the anticoagulant and control groups in the propensity score-weighted prediction model according to DIC status diagnosed using the two criteria are shown in Fig. 3 (J-septic DIC dataset) and Fig. 4 (FORECAST dataset). Consistent with both criteria and both datasets, favorable effects of anticoagulant therapy were observed only in the patient subsets with DIC, whereas differences in mortality between the anticoagulant and control groups in the subsets without DIC were not significant. These findings were consistent between the two datasets and suggested that to determine the optimal target of anticoagulant therapy for sepsis, use of the JAAM DIC and JAAM-2 DIC criteria for diagnosing DIC was considered to be equivalent.

## Clinical Application of the Findings

Several different clinical practice guidelines for DIC have been developed by societies in Britain, 18 Japan, 19 and Italy, 20 along with the harmonized guidance by the ISTH. 21 Some distinct discrepancies in the appraisal of diagnostic criteria for DIC exist between these guidelines. The Japanese and Italian clinical practice guidelines recommend the use of either the JMHW, ISTH, or the JAAM criteria, whereas the British guideline recommends the use of the ISTH criteria. The guidelines do not offer consistent recommendations on diagnosing DIC, and thus, there is currently no definitive agreement as to which of these criteria is superior to the other. The present study does not aim to discuss the diagnostic value of the several DIC criteria because we have no gold standard for DIC diagnosis. No meta-analysis has been conducted so far to compare the prognostic performance among the several available DIC criteria. Nonetheless, we showed that the clinical usefulness of the proposed JAAM-2 DIC criteria was nearly equivalent to that of the traditional JAAM DIC criteria. While a discussion on superiority would be worthless, we showed that the performance of the JAAM-2 scoring system is almost identical to that of the JAAM criteria in terms of mortality prediction and determining treatment timing.

Modification of the JAAM DIC criteria has been discussed in several studies so far. Umemura et al 22 proposed unified DIC criteria involving several hemostatic endothelial molecular markers based on the JAAM DIC criteria and showed that the addition of protein C activity and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 to the original JAAM DIC criteria resulted in greater prognostic value than the original criteria. Iba et al 23 proposed replacing the SIRS score with antithrombin activity in the JAAM DIC criteria. They validated the proposed criteria using a dataset of 819 sepsis patients and found that using AT-based DIC criteria makes it possible to discriminate a more coagulation disorder-specific population. All of these previous attempts were in addition to or replacements of the other variables instead of the SIRS score, and thus, the burden on clinicians still remained. In the present study, we simply omitted the SIRS score, so this modification of the JAAM DIC criteria should allow a totally clinical-friendly approach.

We intended to evaluate the severity of sepsis by adding “SIRS score ≥ 3”; however, the present study showed the prognosis to be not different without this item included. Therefore, we think it is reasonable to omit the SIRS item from the JAAM criteria. In the present analysis, as the JAAM-2 DIC criteria have been shown to increase clinical simplicity without diminishing any diagnostic performance, the educational activities led by our academic society will aid in the replacement of original JAAM with JAAM-2 DIC criteria in Japan. Furthermore, it will be necessary to verify coherence with the sepsis-induced coagulopathy criteria 24 proposed by the ISTH in the future.

## Strengths and Limitations

We acknowledge several limitations of this study. First, due to its retrospective nature, the anticoagulant intervention was not standardized. The indications for the intervention being examined were dependent on the treatment principles of each hospital or each attending physician. Thus, we used propensity scoring to handle the nonrandomization. Second, this study used sub-group analysis, which might have accidentally generated both false-positive and false-negative results. Finally, this article focused only on patients with sepsis among various underlying diseases of DIC. The original JAAM DIC criteria have been reported to be useful in a variety of underlying diseases. 25 26 27 28 Further validation studies of these novel JAAM-2 DIC criteria targeting other underlying diseases such as trauma, postcardiac arrest, and pancreatitis should be conducted in the future.

## Tables

Table 1 Underlying diseases targeted by the JAAM-2 DIC criteria

| 1. Sepsis/severe infection (any microorganism)                                    | 1. Sepsis/severe infection (any microorganism)                                    |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2. Trauma/burn/surgery                                                            | 2. Trauma/burn/surgery                                                            |
| 3. Vascular abnormalities                                                         | 3. Vascular abnormalities                                                         |
|                                                                                   | Large vascular aneurysms                                                          |
|                                                                                   | Giant hemangioma                                                                  |
|                                                                                   | Vasculitis                                                                        |
| 4. Severe toxic or immunological reactions                                        | 4. Severe toxic or immunological reactions                                        |
|                                                                                   | Snakebite                                                                         |
|                                                                                   | Recreational drugs                                                                |
|                                                                                   | Transfusion reactions                                                             |
|                                                                                   | Transplant rejection                                                              |
| 5. Malignancy (except bone marrow suppression)                                    | 5. Malignancy (except bone marrow suppression)                                    |
| 6. Obstetric calamities                                                           | 6. Obstetric calamities                                                           |
| 7. Conditions that may be associated with systemic inflammatory response syndrome | 7. Conditions that may be associated with systemic inflammatory response syndrome |
|                                                                                   | Organ destruction (e.g., severe pancreatitis)                                     |
|                                                                                   | Severe hepatic failure                                                            |
|                                                                                   | Ischemia/hypoxia/shock                                                            |
|                                                                                   | Heat stroke/malignant syndrome                                                    |
|                                                                                   | Fat embolism                                                                      |
|                                                                                   | Rhabdomyolysis                                                                    |
|                                                                                   | Others                                                                            |
| 8. Others                                                                         | 8. Others                                                                         |

Table 3 Baseline characteristics of included sepsis patients in the three datasets

| Characteristics                            | J-septic DIC dataset ( n  = 2,154)         | FORECAST dataset ( n  = 817)               | SPICE dataset ( n  = 608)                  |
|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Age in years                               | 72 (62–80)                                 | 72 (63–82)                                 | 72 (60–82)                                 |
| Male sex                                   | 1,270 (59%)                                | 496 (61%)                                  | 350 (58%)                                  |
| Illness severity                           | Illness severity                           | Illness severity                           | Illness severity                           |
| SIRS score                                 | 3 (2–4)                                    | 3 (2–4)                                    | 3 (2–3)                                    |
| SOFA score                                 | 9 (7–12)                                   | 9 (6–11)                                   | 7 (4.5–10)                                 |
| APACHE II score                            | 22 (17–28)                                 | 22 (17–29)                                 | 20 (14–27)                                 |
| ISTH overt-DIC score                       | 4 (2–5)                                    | 3 (2–4)                                    | 2 (0–3)                                    |
| JAAM DIC score                             | 4 (3–6)                                    | 4 (2–5)                                    | 3 (2–5)                                    |
| Source of ICU admission                    | Source of ICU admission                    | Source of ICU admission                    | Source of ICU admission                    |
| Emergency department                       | 1,018 (47%)                                | 465 (57%)                                  | 350 (58%)                                  |
| Ward                                       | 515 (24%)                                  | 352 (43%)                                  | 258 (42%)                                  |
| Other hospital                             | 621 (29%)                                  | 352 (43%)                                  | 258 (42%)                                  |
| Pre-existing condition                     | Pre-existing condition                     | Pre-existing condition                     | Pre-existing condition                     |
| Liver insufficiency                        | 16 (1%)                                    | 26 (3%)                                    | 26 (4%)                                    |
| Chronic heart failure                      | 116 (5%)                                   | 104 (13%)                                  | 57 (9%)                                    |
| Chronic respiratory disorder               | 85 (4%)                                    | 58 (7%)                                    | 52 (9%)                                    |
| Chronic hemodialysis                       | 167 (8%)                                   | 52 (6%)                                    | 52 (9%)                                    |
| Immunocompromised                          | 228 (11%)                                  | 96 (12%)                                   | 38 (6%)                                    |
| New organ dysfunction (SOFA subscores ≥ 2) | New organ dysfunction (SOFA subscores ≥ 2) | New organ dysfunction (SOFA subscores ≥ 2) | New organ dysfunction (SOFA subscores ≥ 2) |
| Respiratory                                | 1,489 (69%)                                | 575 (70%)                                  | 370 (61%)                                  |
| Cardiovascular                             | 1,416 (66%)                                | 461 (56%)                                  | 254 (42%)                                  |
| Renal                                      | 1,071 (50%)                                | 413 (51%)                                  | 268 (44%)                                  |
| Hepatic                                    | 383 (18%)                                  | 127 (16%)                                  | 84 (14%)                                   |
| Coagulation                                | 816 (38%)                                  | 233 (29%)                                  | 127 (21%)                                  |
| Primary source of infection                | Primary source of infection                | Primary source of infection                | Primary source of infection                |
| Abdomen                                    | 696 (32%)                                  | 212 (26%)                                  | 120 (20%)                                  |
| Lung                                       | 556 (26%)                                  | 259 (32%)                                  | 203 (33%)                                  |
| Urinary tract                              | 385 (18%)                                  | 159 (19%)                                  | 102 (17%)                                  |
| Bone/soft tissue                           | 250 (12%)                                  | 111 (14%)                                  | 90 (15%)                                   |
| Central nervous system                     | 50 (2%)                                    | 15 (2%)                                    | 15 (2%)                                    |
| Other/unknown                              | 217 (10%)                                  | 61 (7%)                                    | 78 (13%)                                   |
| Other therapeutic interventions            | Other therapeutic interventions            | Other therapeutic interventions            | Other therapeutic interventions            |
| Immunoglobulin                             | 685 (32%)                                  | 158 (19%)                                  |                                            |
| Low-dose steroids                          | 539 (25%)                                  | 241 (30%)                                  |                                            |
| Renal replacement therapy                  | 599 (28%)                                  | 231 (28%)                                  |                                            |
| PMX-DHP                                    | 465 (22%)                                  | 78 (10%)                                   |                                            |
| Surgical intervention                      | 906 (42%)                                  | 145 (18%)                                  |                                            |

## Figures

Fig. 1 Patient flow for the three datasets used in this study. DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; JAAM, Japanese Association for Acute Medicine; ROC, receiver operating characteristic.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 Receiver operating characteristic curves for original JAAM and modified JAAM-2 DIC criteria as predictors of in-hospital mortality. The solid line represents curves for JAAM-2, and the dotted line represents curves for original JAAM. (A) J-Septic DIC dataset, (B) FORECAST dataset, (C) SPICE dataset. DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; JAAM, Japanese Association for Acute Medicine.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3 Adjusted estimated survival curves according to the original JAAM and modified JAAM-2 DIC status using the J-septic DIC dataset. (A) JAAM DIC score ≤ 3, (B) JAAM DIC score ≥ 4, (C) JAAM-2 DIC score ≤ 2, and (D) JAAM-2 DIC score ≥ 3. The solid line represents patients in the anticoagulant group, and the dotted line represents patients in the control group. DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; JAAM, Japanese Association for Acute Medicine.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4 Adjusted estimated survival curves according to the original JAAM and modified JAAM-2 DIC status using the FORECAST dataset. (A) JAAM DIC score ≤ 3, (B) JAAM DIC score ≥ 4, (C) JAAM-2 DIC score ≤ 2, and (D) JAAM-2 DIC score ≥ 3. The solid line represents patients in the anticoagulant group, and the dotted line represents patients in the control group. DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; JAAM, Japanese Association for Acute Medicine.

<!-- image -->

## References

- M Levi; H Ten Cate. Disseminated intravascular coagulation. N Engl J Med (1999)
- M Hayakawa; S Saito; S Uchino. Characteristics, treatments, and outcomes of severe sepsis of 3195 ICU-treated adult patients throughout Japan during 2011-2013. J Intensive Care (2016)
- S Gando; A Shiraishi; K Yamakawa. Role of disseminated intravascular coagulation in severe sepsis. Thromb Res (2019)
- N Kobayashi; T Maekawa; M Takada; H Tanaka; H Gonmori. Criteria for diagnosis of DIC based on the analysis of clinical and laboratory findings in 345 DIC patients collected by the Research Committee on DIC in Japan. Bibl Haematol (1983)
- F B Taylor; C H Toh; W K Hoots; H Wada; M Levi. Towards definition, clinical and laboratory criteria, and a scoring system for disseminated intravascular coagulation. Thromb Haemost (2001)
- T Iba; Y Umemura; E Watanabe; T Wada; K Hayashida; S Kushimoto. Diagnosis of sepsis-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation and coagulopathy. Acute Med Surg (2019)
- K Yamakawa; J Yoshimura; T Ito; M Hayakawa; T Hamasaki; S Fujimi. External validation of the two newly proposed criteria for assessing coagulopathy in sepsis. Thromb Haemost (2019)
- S Gando; T Iba; Y Eguchi. A multicenter, prospective validation of disseminated intravascular coagulation diagnostic criteria for critically ill patients: comparing current criteria. Crit Care Med (2006)
- S Gando; D Saitoh; H Ogura. Natural history of disseminated intravascular coagulation diagnosed based on the newly established diagnostic criteria for critically ill patients: results of a multicenter, prospective survey. Crit Care Med (2008)
- H Ogura; S Gando; T Iba. SIRS-associated coagulopathy and organ dysfunction in critically ill patients with thrombocytopenia. Shock (2007)
- . American College of Chest Physicians/Society of Critical Care Medicine Consensus Conference: definitions for sepsis and organ failure and guidelines for the use of innovative therapies in sepsis. Crit Care Med (1992)
- K M Kaukonen; M Bailey; D Pilcher; D J Cooper; R Bellomo. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome criteria in defining severe sepsis. N Engl J Med (2015)
- M Singer; C S Deutschman; C W Seymour. The Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA (2016)
- T Abe; H Ogura; A Shiraishi. Characteristics, management, and in-hospital mortality among patients with severe sepsis in intensive care units in Japan: the FORECAST study. Crit Care (2018)
- T Abe; K Yamakawa; H Ogura. Epidemiology of sepsis and septic shock in intensive care units between sepsis-2 and sepsis-3 populations: sepsis prognostication in intensive care unit and emergency room (SPICE-ICU). J Intensive Care (2020)
- R C Bone; R A Balk; F B Cerra. Definitions for sepsis and organ failure and guidelines for the use of innovative therapies in sepsis. Chest (1992)
- J L Vincent; R Moreno; J Takala. The SOFA (Sepsis-related Organ Failure Assessment) score to describe organ dysfunction/failure. On behalf of the Working Group on Sepsis-Related Problems of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med (1996)
- M Levi; C H Toh; J Thachil; H G Watson. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Br J Haematol (2009)
- H Wada; H Asakura; K Okamoto. Expert consensus for the treatment of disseminated intravascular coagulation in Japan. Thromb Res (2010)
- M Di Nisio; F Baudo; B Cosmi. Diagnosis and treatment of disseminated intravascular coagulation: guidelines of the Italian Society for Haemostasis and Thrombosis (SISET). Thromb Res (2012)
- H Wada; J Thachil; M Di Nisio. Guidance for diagnosis and treatment of DIC from harmonization of the recommendations from three guidelines. J Thromb Haemost (2013)
- Y Umemura; K Yamakawa; T Kiguchi. Design and evaluation of new unified criteria for disseminated intravascular coagulation based on the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine Criteria. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost (2016)
- T Iba; M Di Nisio; J Thachil. Revision of the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine (JAAM) disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) diagnostic criteria using antithrombin activity. Crit Care (2016)
- T Iba; M D Nisio; J H Levy; N Kitamura; J Thachil. New criteria for sepsis-induced coagulopathy (SIC) following the revised sepsis definition: a retrospective analysis of a nationwide survey. BMJ Open (2017)
- S Kushimoto; S Gando; D Saitoh. Clinical course and outcome of disseminated intravascular coagulation diagnosed by Japanese Association for Acute Medicine criteria. Comparison between sepsis and trauma. Thromb Haemost (2008)
- A Sawamura; M Hayakawa; S Gando. Application of the Japanese Association for Acute Medicine disseminated intravascular coagulation diagnostic criteria for patients at an early phase of trauma. Thromb Res (2009)
- K Iwai; S Uchino; A Endo; K Saito; Y Kase; M Takinami. Prospective external validation of the new scoring system for disseminated intravascular coagulation by Japanese Association for Acute Medicine (JAAM). Thromb Res (2010)
- T Takemitsu; H Wada; T Hatada. Prospective evaluation of three different diagnostic criteria for disseminated intravascular coagulation. Thromb Haemost (2011)